Clarify that the unprotected header MUST be empty before a Signed Statement is included in the Append-only log (#349)
ietf-wg-scitt/draft-ietf-scitt-architecture: draft-ietf-scitt-architecture.md

A Receipt's verification key, signing algorithm, validity period, header parameters or other claims MAY change each time a Receipt is produced.

Anyone with access to the Transparency Service can independently verify its consistency and review the complete list of Transparent Statements registered by each Issuer.

> However, the Registrations on a separate Transparency Service is generally disjoint, though it is possible to take a Transparent Statement (i.e. a Signed Statement with a Receipt in its unprotected header, from the first Transparency Service) and register it on another Transparency Service, where the second Receipt will be over the first Receipt in the unprotected header.

Reviewer: +1 to removing this. Registering signed statements across multiple transparency services are independent actions. While it's possible to attach multiple receipts, the VDS does nothing with the receipts in the unprotected headers. 
A TS can store the signed statement, with the receipts, but they're "unprotected".

A Transparency Service MUST ensure that a Signed Statement is registered before releasing its Receipt.

A Transparency Service MAY accept a Signed Statement with content in its unprotected header, and MAY use values from that unprotected header during verification and registration policy evaluation.

> However, the unprotected header of all Signed Statements in the Append-only log MUST be empty. A Transparency Service MUST replace the unprotected header with an empty unprotected header before inclusion in the Append-only log.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the unprotected header of all Signed Statements in the Append-only log MUST be empty.
A Transparency Service MUST replace the unprotected header with an empty unprotected header before inclusion in the Append-only log.
```

A Transparency Service MUST ensure that a Signed Statement is registered before releasing its Receipt.

A Transparency Service MAY accept a Signed Statement with content in its unprotected header, and MAY use values from that unprotected header during verification and registration policy evaluation.

> However, the unprotected header of all Signed Statements in the Append-only log MUST be empty.

Reviewer 2: this prevents registering receipts

Author: Yes, this was discussed a couple of times in #321. The alternatives are:

1. Include all the unprotected header in VDS, which is unappealing because its provenance and authenticity are unknown.
2. Special-case individual unprotected header parameters, and/or authenticate them against separate trust anchors. There was also no appetite for going there.

Conversely, it is possible to support registering receipts by emitting a new signed statement that includes them in its protected header. This is obviously an extra burden, but it is perhaps acceptable considering the unknown importance of this scenario in actual usage.

I think it would be nice to let the registration policy perform separate authentication/verification of unprotected header parameters, and mark them for selective inclusion in the VDS, along with what's authenticated against the issuer identity. But it's something we prototyped, and it's fiddly with existing CBOR implementations, because of canonical encoding issues, and it does complicate the user story for proof verification a fair bit too. This seems like a good baseline, which we can revisit when we have solid implementations of something better.

> A Transparency Service MUST replace the unprotected header with an empty unprotected header before inclusion in the Append-only log.

Author: Eliminate is a strong word, but it definitely prevents their inclusion in the VDS. Implementers have two options though: store the full Signed Statement in an Adjacent Service (which is what @robinbryce @JAG-UK and @SteveLasker are doing, as I understand it), or refuse to consider the unprotected header during verification/registration (the route we are taking for now).

> A Transparency Service MUST replace the unprotected header with an empty unprotected header before inclusion in the Append-only log.

Reviewer: This is also a closed PR. If someone believes this needs to be revised, please open a new issue or PR as continued comments on closed PRs/Issues are isolated audiences.

A Transparency Service MUST ensure that a Signed Statement is registered before releasing its Receipt.

> The unprotected header of a Signed Statment added to the Verifiable Data Structure MUST be empty. If the unprotected header of a Signed Statment submitted to the TS is not empty, the TS MUST replace it with an empty unprotected header prior to inclusion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Transparency Service may receive a Signed Statement with content in the unprotected header; however, when writing the Verifiable Data Structure, the unprotected header of the Signed Statement MUST replaced with an empty unprotected header.
```

Reviewer 3: Doesn't it have to be MAY?

Author: The rewrite is hopefully clearer, if a bit heavy. I was a little thrown off by the discussion earlier this week, but realised by skimming through that the document largely talks about "Append-only log" as a logical concept, and only briefly mentions VDS (from the COSE receipts draft) as an implementation mechanism. So I've aligned with that here for consistency.

Author: @aj-stein my sense is that "A Transparency Service MAY receive" is not ideal, because it feels descriptive rather than prescriptive, and so I have rewritten this to be "The TS MAY accept".

@aj-stein @SteveLasker can you check you are happy with the wording?

A Transparency Service MUST ensure that a Signed Statement is registered before releasing its Receipt.

> The unprotected header SHOULD be empty when registering a signed statement.

Author: I would love MUST, I am [all for it](https://github.com/ietf-wg-scitt/draft-ietf-scitt-architecture/issues/321#issuecomment-2663606794), but that means taking off the stuff about protected `x5t` and unprotected `x5chain`. Are you, @JAG-UK and @robinbryce happy with that?

I'm good to go, I am firmly in the protected `x5chain` camp! :)

> The unprotected header SHOULD be empty when registering a signed statement.

Reviewer: IMO, leaving it a should, with the ability for some implementations to reject registration, defeats the interop goals. 
I realize this unwinds some other decisions, but we had "punted" decisions like the x5t to be in the unprotected header to move forward.
The signed statement isn't stored within the VDS (consolidated term for Append-only ledger), so the service can still store the receipt or other content in the unprotected header in the ancillary service. Unless I'm missing something, the notarized receipt doesn't cover the unprotected header, so I don't see the value of leaving this open-ended.

> The unprotected header SHOULD be empty when registering a signed statement.

Author: @SteveLasker welcome (again) to the loop :) I think I prefer stripping to this, because it's clearer and more interoperable. But really I am fine with either. I am also fine with going full protected.

> The unprotected header SHOULD be empty when registering a signed statement.

Reviewer: @robinbryce and I just talked through this. I believe we're having a layering discussion that's causing confusion.
The "Registration Process" is a sub-system of the Transparency Service. 
The Transparency Service, as defined through SCRAPI, CAN ingest a signed statement with content in the unprotected header. It's very useful to have a property bag to enable sharing additional information, even if there's now way to prove when/how/where that data was added. It clearly is defined as "**Unprotected**"

By allowing a Signed Statement to be submitted to the TS, would enable the Transparency Service to save the unprotected header, as it was submitted. 
And, it would allow the Transparency Service to strip the unprotected header when doing the registration on the VDS.
I believe we agreed it's a MUST to remove the Unprotected Header when creating a VDS, and the unprotected header MUST be stripped when verifying a VDS to the signed statement.  It's not a MUST that the unprotected header must be stripped on submission to the Transparency Service. 

I'm going to draw a quick picture...

> The unprotected header SHOULD be empty when registering a signed statement.

Author: > I believe we agreed it's a MUST to remove the Unprotected Header when creating a VDS, and the unprotected header MUST be stripped when verifying a VDS to the signed statement. It's not a MUST that the unprotected header must be stripped on submission to the Transparency Service.

I think that is this what I meant when I proposed stripping the unprotected header in the first place: it can be sent, it can even be used as supporting evidence in the registration (unprotected `x5chain` with binding for example), _but_ it is stripped before creation of the VDS.

This is a slight complication for a sender, because what the receipt binds to is not always exactly what is sent. But the stripping is easy enough to perform?
I will have another go at a PR tomorrow, unless someone else objects :)

> The unprotected header SHOULD be empty when registering a signed statement.

Reviewer: ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f5bedfea-c2b9-45e4-ab08-520e596153ea)

An Implementation of a Transparency Service
1. The Signed Envelope, with optional content in the unprotected header submitted to SCRAPI
2. The Signed Statement is accepted and optionally stored in an Ancillary Service, providing indexing, querying, and retrieval of the submitted Signed Statement
3. Within the Transparency Service, the Unprotected Header MAY contain an x5chain used to verify the issuer
4. The Unprotected Header MUST be stripped before creation of the Verfiable Data Structure, placed on the Immutable Ledger.
5. The notarized Receipt of Registration is returned through SCRAPI
6. A Transparent Statement MAY be created, adding the Receipt to the unprotected header of the Signed Statement

> The unprotected header SHOULD be empty when registering a signed statement.

Author: Ok, I have amended the wording now, and I am doing a scan to make sure I didn't miss anything. Please check.
